---
layout: post
title: "A referesher on Asymptotic Notations, Loop Analysis and Runtime Analysis"
date: 2019-02-08
mathjax: true
categories: Algorithm
---
# Definitions
$\theta(g(n)) = \\{\, f(n) \mid \text{there exists positive constants } c_1, c_2 \text{ and } n_0 \text{ such that } 0 \le c_1g(n) \le f(n) \le c_2g(n) \text{ for all } n \ge n_0 \, \\}$

$O(g(n)) = \\{\, f(n) \mid \text{there exists positive constants } c \text{ and } n_0 \text{ such that } 0 \le f(n) \le cg(n) \text{ for all } n \ge n_0 \, \\}$

$o(g(n)) = \\{\, f(n) \mid \text{for any positive constant } c > 0 \text{ there exists a constant } n_0 >0  \text{ such that } 0 \le f(n) \lt cg(n) \text{ for all } n \ge n_0 \, \\}$


$\Omega(g(n)) = \\{\, f(n) \mid \text{there exists positive constants } c \text{ and } n_0 \text{ such that } 0 \le cg(n) \le f(n) \text{ for all } n \ge n_0 \, \\}$

$\omega(g(n)) = \\{\, f(n) \mid \text{for any positive constant } c > 0 \text{ there exists a constant } n_0 >0  \text{ such that } 0 \le cg(n) \lt f(n) \text{ for all } n \ge n_0 \, \\}$

# How to Interpret Asymptotic Notations in Equations
**Rule 1**: When the asymptotic notation stands alone on the right side of an equation or inequality, equal sign means set membership.

**Example**: $n = O(n^2)$ means $n \in O(n^2)$.

**Rule 2**: In general, when asymptotic notation appears in a formula, we interpret it as standing for some anonymous function that we do not care to name. 

**Example**: $2n^2 + 3n + 1 = 2n^2 + \theta(n)$ means that $2n^2 + 3n + 1 = 2n^2 + f(n)$, where $f(n)$ is some function in the set $\theta(n)$ (in this case $f(n) = 3n + 1$).

**Example**: $T(n) = 2T(n/2) + \theta(n)$. 

**Rule 3**: The number of anonymous functions in an expression is equal to the number of times the asymptotic notations appears.

**Example**: in $\sum_{i=0}^n O(i)$, there is only a single anonymous function. This is not the same as $O(1) + O(2) + \cdots + O(n)$, which doesn't have a clear interpretation.

**Rule 4**: When the asymptotic notation appears on the left side of an equation or inequality, we interpret it as: No matter how the anonymous functions are chosen on the left side, there is a way to choose the anonymous functions on the right side to make the equation valid.

**Example**: $2n^2 + \theta(n) = \theta(n^2)$.
# Rules
**Transitivity**:

$f(n) = \theta(g(n))$ and $g(n) = \theta(h(n)) \Rightarrow f(n) = \theta(h(n))$

$f(n) = O(g(n))$ and $g(n) = O(h(n)) \Rightarrow f(n) = O(h(n))$

$f(n) = \Omega(g(n))$ and $g(n) = \Omega(h(n)) \Rightarrow f(n) = \Omega(h(n))$

$f(n) = o(g(n))$ and $g(n) = o(h(n)) \Rightarrow f(n) = o(h(n))$

$f(n) = \omega(g(n))$ and $g(n) = \omega(h(n)) \Rightarrow f(n) = \omega(h(n))$

**Reflexivity**:

$f(n) = \theta(f(n))$

$f(n) = O(f(n))$

$f(n) = \Omega(f(n))$

**Symmetry**:

$f(n) = \theta(g(n))$ if and only if $g(n) = \theta(f(n))$

**Related Theorem**:

$f(n) = \theta(g(n))$ if and only if $f(n) = O(g(n))$ and $f(n) = \Omega(g(n))$

**Transpose Symmetry**:

$f(n) = O(g(n))$ if and only if $g(n) = \Omega(f(n))$

$f(n) = o(g(n))$ if and only if $g(n) = \omega(f(n))$

**Trichotomy**:

For any two real numbers $a$ and $b$, exactly one of the following must hold: $$a < b, a = b, a > b$$.

However, not all functions are asymptotically comparable. That is, for two functions $f(n)$ and $g(n)$, it may be the case that neither $f(n) = O(g(n))$ nor $f(n) = \Omega(g(n))$ holds.

Example: $f(n) = n, g(n) = n^{1 + \sin n}$.

## Examples
**Example**:

Let $f_1(n) = \theta(g_1(n))$ and $f_2(n) = \theta(g_2(n))$ be asymptotically nonnegative. Prove or disprove the following:
1. $f_1(n) + f_2(n) = \theta\left(g_1(n) + g_2(n)\right)$
2. $f_1(n) - f_2(n) = \theta\left(g_1(n) - g_2(n)\right)$
3. $f_1(n) \cdot f_2(n) = \theta\left(g_1(n) \cdot g_2(n)\right)$
1. $\frac{f_1(n)}{f_2(n)} = \theta\left(\frac{g_1(n)}{g_2(n)}\right)$. 

**Proof**:
By the definition of $\theta$ we have:

$$
\begin{align}
0 \le c_1g_1(n) \le f_1(n) \le c_2g_1(n) \text{ for all } n \ge n_1 \tag{1} \\
0 \le d_1g_2(n) \le f_2(n) \le d_2g_2(n) \text{ for all } n \ge n_2 \tag{2} 
\end{align}
$$

**1)**: $(1)+(2)$ gives

$$
\begin{align}
c_1g_1(n) + d_1g_2(n)  &\le f_1(n)+f_2(n) \le c_2g_1(n) + d_2g_2(n) &\text{ for all } n \ge max(n_1, n_2) \\
min(c_1, d_1)(g_1(n)+g_2(n) & \le f_1(n)+f_2(n) \le max(c_2, d_2)(g_1(n)+g_2(n)) &\text{ for all } n \ge max(n_1, n_2)
\end{align}
$$

So $f_1(n) + f_2(n) = \theta\left(g_1(n) + g_2(n)\right)$

**2)**: An counter examples would be:

$$
\begin{align}
f_1(n) &= 2n    \\
f_2(n) &= n + 1 \\
g_1(n) &= n +1  \\
g_2(n) &= n     
\end{align}
$$

**Note**: 

The relation would holf if $g_1(n) = o(g_2(n))$

Intuitively, this fails because after $(1) - (2)$ we cannot guarantee that LHS and RHS are both positive. 

**3)**: $(1) \times (2)$ and the result follows trivially.

**4)**: $(1) \div (2)$ and the result follows trivially.

**Example**:

Let $f(n)$ and $g(n)$ be positive non-decreasing functions such that $f(n) - g(n) = \theta(1)$. Prove $f(n) = \theta(g(n))$. 

**Proof**:

By definition we have 

$$
0 \le c_1 \le f(n) - g(n) \le c_2 \quad \text{ for all } n \ge n_0 \ge 0
$$

First prove the LHS. 

$$
\begin{align}
f(n) &\ge g(n) + c_1 &&\text{[ add } g(n) \text{ to both sides ]} \\
     &\ge g(n)       &&\text{[ } c_1 \text{ positive ]}         \\        
\end{align}
$$

Now on the RHS. 

$$
\begin{align}
f(n) &\le g(n) + c_2 \\  
     &= \left(\frac{c_2}{g(n)} + 1\right)g(n) \\
     &\le \left(\frac{c_2}{g(1)} + 1\right)g(n) && \text{ [ } g(n) \text{ non-desreasing ]}

\end{align}
$$

Intuitively, because $g(n)$ is non-decreasing, eventually the constant $c_2$ becomes a non-factor, so we basically have $f(n) \le g(n)$. 

**Example**: 

Let $f(n)$ and $g(n)$ be asymptotically nonnegative functions. Prove that $max(f(n), g(n)) = \theta(f(n) + g(n))$.

**Proof**: 

choose $n_0$ such that for all $n \ge n_0, f(n)$ and $g(n)$ are nonnegative. Then:

$$
\begin{align}
max(f(n), g(n)) & \le f(n) + g(n) &&\text{[ $f(n)$ and $g(n)$ are nonnegative]} \\
2max(f(n), g(n)) & \ge f(n) + g(n) &&\text{[property of max()]}
\end{align}
$$

Thus we have 

$$
\frac{1}{2}(f(n) + g(n)) \le max(f(n), g(n) \le f(n) + g(n) \text{ for all } n \ge n_0
$$

, which is the definition of $\theta(f(n) + g(n))$ with $c_1 = \frac{1}{2}$ and $c_2 = 1$.

**Example**:

 Let $f(n)$ and $g(n)$ be positive functions. Prove that $min(f(n), g(n)) = \theta\left(\frac{f(n)g(n)}{f(n)+g(n)}\right)$.


**Proof**: 

Two handy properties:
1. $max(f(n), g(n)) \le f(n) + g(n) \le 2max(f(n), g(n))$
2. $f(n)*g(n) = max(f(n), g(n)) * min(f(n), g(n))$

Notice that

$$
\begin{align}
\left(\frac{f(n)g(n)}{f(n)+g(n)}\right) & = \left(\frac{max(f(n), g(n))min(f(n), g(n))}{f(n)+g(n)}\right) && \text{[ by property 2 ]} \\
& = \left(\frac{max(f(n), g(n))}{f(n)+g(n)}\right)min(f(n), g(n)) \\
& \le \left(\frac{f(n)+g(n)}{f(n)+g(n)}\right)min(f(n),g(n)) && \text{[ by property 1 ]} \\
& = min(f(n), g(n))
\end{align}
$$

Similarly,

$$
\begin{align}
\left(\frac{f(n)g(n)}{f(n)+g(n)}\right) & = \left(\frac{max(f(n), g(n))}{f(n)+g(n)}\right)min(f(n), g(n)) \\
& \ge \left(\frac{\frac{1}{2}(f(n)+g(n))}{f(n)+g(n)}\right)min(f(n),g(n)) && \text{[ by property 1 ]} \\
& = \frac{1}{2}min(f(n), g(n))
\end{align}
$$

Thus we have

$$
\begin{align}
\left(\frac{f(n)g(n)}{f(n)+g(n)}\right) & = \theta(min(f(n), g(n)) &&\text{[ by definition of } \theta \text{ ]}\\
min(f(n), g(n)) & = \theta\left(\frac{f(n)g(n)}{f(n)+g(n)}\right) &&\text{[ by symmetry of } \theta  \text{ ]}
\end{align}
$$

 



